respondent step Farson she's joining us
live from the ha and and and and step
the judge uh went to Great length to
explain how and why the court will make
this decision he talked about how much
the circumstances have changed since the
provisional measures that were ordered
in January and March you know noting
that this is of course not the first
time that South Africa has gone to the
international court of justice why they
have changed the risk the very real risk
that they posed to the Palestinian
people in Gaza before issuing those
orders talk us through
them yes it was very clear that the 13
judges of the 15 were all agreeing on
the fact that the situation in Rafa is a
red line uh the situation had changed uh
desperately he said he was uh using
words as a serious exceptional dire uh
situation he said especially the fact
that so many people are now displaced
800,000 and he also said he doesn't
believe the words that Israel said that
they were all giving enough safety and
humanitarian uh access to these people
that are being brought to these
so-called evacuation zones uh he said he
just simply didn't see that there was no
evidence of that so that's why he has
now made this very strong order that
Israel should stop immediately its
offensive and its military operation in
Rafa and withdraw its troops from there
it also uh he also ruled on the border
crossings that they need to be opened as
soon as possible to get humanitarian Aid
in and also interestingly he said that
the observers from the United Nations
have to also get access as soon as
possible to make sure that no evidence
uh of any possible war crimes is going
to be disappearing so they need to get
that access as soon as possible to do
these investigations and Israel has to
report about all these steps within a
month back to the court step thank you
very much for that no doubt we will be
coming uh back to you very soon but for
now let's bring in our diplomatic editor
James baz who has been watching the
Court's proceedings with us and a lot to
unpack here James before we get to the
nitty into the nitty-gritty how
significant is the ruling what do you
make of this very very strong order from
the court on this occasion uh they've
had two previous orders um provisional
measures they call them um where they've
told Israel to let the aid in and stop
some of these measures that could
plausibly be leading to a genocide uh
but now they've followed South Africa's
lead which is was was asking for this um
South Africa very specific this time
they tightened their focus to the Rafa
offensive and the orders are really
clear stop the Rafa offensive now open
the Rafa border crossing now and let any
investigative body and un body into into
um into Gaza through the Rafa Crossing
very very clear orders that Israel and
he said made it a point at the end this
has binding effect there is an
international legal obligation this is
the top Court in the UN system it's
elected by the 193 member states of the
United Nations a joint election that
takes place in the security Council and
the general assembly Israel is a member
state of the United Nations under
international law Israel must do what
it's told
and but since it's been told the first
time in January to not commit any acts
that could amount to genocide among
other things Israel has killed more than
15,000 people in Gaza I I know that
you're saying there certainly very
strong orders but if we look at perhaps
the most important one the one that
South Africa was asking for more
urgently most urgently to immediately
halt its military offensive if you look
at the wording James I wonder if Israel
will find room to maneuver here because
it says it immediately halt its military
offensive and any other action in Rafa
which may inflict on the Palestinian
group in Gaza conditions of life that
could bring about its physical
destruction in whole or in part could
Israel argue that its operations um
don't inflict on Palestinians in Gaza
you know the conditions of life that
would bring about their destruction do
how do you see Israel engaging with this
I'm sure Israel will again say we gave
everyone warning and there were
evacuation orders and people should just
follow them but the court talked about
that ab and it's pretty clear it doesn't
accept that yeah Israel has to comply
with this but the second part of it is
Israel will not we know how Israel
operates we know there are numerous
Security Council resolutions that Israel
is not uh complied with I have no
expectation that Israel is going to
suddenly put prime minister Netanyahu on
television in an hour and say we're
ending the raffer offensive which means
that this court has done its bit but
this court has no enforcement power
whatsoever in the UN system the
enforcement power goes back to New York
and it's then a question of uh the um
Security Council and the general
assembly particularly the security
Council because that has the power under
the UN Charter to put in enforcement
measures if the security Council decided
it it could send in an international
Force to make Israel do what it wants so
the pressure is on the security Council
but in particular the pressure is on the
United States we saw the outrage in the
US earlier this week when the
international criminal court that's a
separate Court in the hay came up with
um with recommendations from the
prosecutor which then have to go to
judges uh that Prime Min Netanyahu and
defense minister Galant um should face
arrest warrants for crimes against
humanity and war crimes that that have
taken place uh in Gaza it's harder for
the US when it comes to this this is the
international court of justice um all
member states must abide by this and yes
the US is saying the same thing as this
court the US for weeks has been saying
the raffer crossing must be open and
there shouldn't be a Rafer offensive the
US doesn't disagree with this so when
someone brings this up in the security
Council and I have no doubt that this
will be the basis now of a resolution
towards the security Council probably
Algeria they're the current Arab member
of the security Council how is the US
going to veto that when do you expect
this to come up in front of the UN
Security Council we'll have to ask our
colleagues in New York there's actually
an interesting um security Council vote
coming up soon on the whole issue of
international humanitarian law which is
what Israel is clearly defying here not
specifically about Gaza but about
International humanitarian law and how
people are not obeying it and how to
strengthen it um so so Ambassador is
going to be meeting shortly I think
given given that the measures here are
so strong you could come up with a
security Council resolution that is
literally a few a a few paragraphs long
uh because it simply could say the
security Council demands that Israel
abide by the provisional measures put in
place uh by the international court of
justice um I suspect though the way the
security Council works and I've spent a
lot of time in New York following their
deliberations they'll be back and forth
on this the US will try and moderate
what others want to do but it puts I
think the Biden Administration in a very
difficult position and it puts Israel in
I think one of the most difficult weeks
it's had um it both diplomatically
legally because we've had that I
prosecutor saying the Prime Minister and
the defense minister should face arrest
warrants we've had this um very very
strong ruling by the international court
of justice and we've had fresh momentum
in the recognition of the Palestinian
state by three key European countries
and when you look at the orders and
judge Salam went through who's in favor
and who's against it breaks down as
previous orders that we've seen from the
international court of justice with 13
in favor two against the two being the
ad hoc Israeli judge and the Ugandan
judge how much does this once again
highlight what the world wants to see
happen and how isolated the Israel and
the United States are on this absolutely
um yes it's worth telling you who that
Ugandan judge is Julia seend she also
voted against the majority of the Court
um in previous um uh discussions around
the court um on previous um provisional
measures she's Ugandan and actually
she's since become the vice president of
the Court uh since the first uh ruling
uh back in January but it's I mean and
the only other person joining is is um
judge Barack who is just appointed for
this hearing the way it works is you
have a set of Judges who are there
permanently and then if a country is on
is is on the um is being discussed in
the court is facing proceedings in the
court um and they don't have a judge
already on the court they're allowed to
have their own adah judge and so it's
the Israeli judge who has joined her in
these rulings it's worth telling you
that these are um these judges of the
international court of justice as I say
elected by the security Council and the
UN General Assembly for 9-year terms
they are people at the peak of the legal
profession some of them actually go
beyond the legal profession I can tell
you I know two of them and have
interviewed two of them um the president
of the of the Court uh who I know
because he used to be the Lebanese
ambassador to the United Nations he's a
former president of the UN Security
Council a former vice president of the
Gen General general assembly and another
one of the the judges uh bo Bogdan orcu
is the former foreign minister he's a
he's a lawyer and a distinguished lawyer
he's a former foreign minister of
Romania so people very well qualified to
be undertaking these RS people that you
can wonder how they're going to create a
narrative that these are anti-semites
because you're going to hear it
absolutely James thank you so much for
now that's our atic editor James
baz make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer